As the pain begins, Labour must again become the people's party
Mary Riddell, THE TELEGRAPH
Send not to know for whom the bell tolls. It tolls for thee. David Cameron has warned that cuts will alter Britain's "whole way of life" and affect "every single person in our country." This message offers an echo of John Donne's adage: No man is an island. That said, those living on the Isle of Dogs can expect to feel Mr Cameron's axe more keenly than those with fortunes tied up, say, in Belize.
However pious the Coalition's intentions, there will be no equality of pain. Nick Clegg's "progressive cuts" are likely to be slash and burn under an analgesic label. That is where the Labour leadership candidates come in.
As the austerity drive begins, the contestants are setting out their stalls before nominations close. By Thursday, the Miliband brothers and Ed Balls will most probably be joined on the ballot paper by Andy Burnham.
The spectre of public service carnage should ignite a fight that has so far had the drama of a beetle drive. Onlookers complain that the four main runners are so homogenised that you can't tell your Miliballs from your Burnibands, which is not quite fair. David Miliband, the front runner, has outlined how to make Labour a grassroots engine of change. His brother, Ed, is pushing for a £7.14 an hour living wage for the poorest. Mr Balls favours a graduate tax to help less well-off students, and Mr Burnham has told The Daily Telegraph that he wants a default estate tax to underpin fair social care for the elderly.
Even so, the contest has been muted. Critics, including the Left-wing non-runner, Jon Cruddas, have complained of a sour orthodoxy based on welfare and immigration. Mr Balls has now cranked up that rhetoric, demanding a rethink on the EU directive that enshrines people's right to free movement. While the other candidates might differ on detail and emphasis, none disagrees with Mr Balls's basic premise that immigration helped lose Labour the election and that the party must now focus on its errors. They are all wrong.

It is indisputable that Labour made a mess of immigration, ushering in too many people on a wave of political correctness and lax controls. That mistake was remedied, a tough points system was introduced, and net immigration fell by more than 11 per cent in the year to September 2009. Among the A8 accession states, which joined the EU in 2004, 12,000 more citizens left the UK than arrived.
The Institute for Public Policy Research calculates that we may be on course for net immigration of less 100,000 without any need for Mr Cameron's cap – a move likely to damage our economy and public services. Immigration is yesterday's scare story, and the C2 voters who deserted Labour were, in any case, worried about other things.
They wanted flats for their children and a promise that they would not be flung out of work to make way for someone cheaper. Migration stood proxy for diverse terrors, and Labour, unwilling to shift the focus on to its failure to provide homes and stop wages being undercut, was happy for too long to let it be so.
While it's good that the candidates are acknowledging some follies, the focus on immigration has made the debate sound dour and insular. The Milliballs quartet remind no one of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.
None the less, they are flirting with the politics of hatred when the party's only chance is to forge the politics of hope.
The Coalition's enthusiasm for Canadian-style cuts suggests how Labour might promote some feelgood cutbacks. Prisons are one opportunity. Faced with a $42 billion deficit in 1993, the Chrétien government stopped building jails and forbade incarceration if any reasonable alternative existed. The jail population fell by 11 per cent in a decade, crime rates are at a 
25-year low, and recent moves by the Harper government to increase prison spending have been met with incredulity. What a chance for a would-be Labour leader to dismantle an inhumane penal system that is a drain on the economy and an affront to the human spirit.
With the Lib Dems subsumed into Government, this is the moment for Labour to colonise their abandoned terrain. When we can only spend what we must, the feeble justification for replacing Trident becomes non-existent. Anyone who doubts that this is the age of political cross-dressing should watch Mr Cameron. No cause was dearer to Sarah and Gordon Brown than stopping women dying needlessly in pregnancy and childbirth. Audaciously, the PM has taken up that mantle, promising a new £5 million fund to help developing countries.
But the Lib Cons are also providing open goals. Mr Balls is already tearing into Michael Gove's elitist education plans, Miliband Senior has branded Nick Clegg a "hypocrite", and Mr Burnham is planning to highlight Vince Cable's cutting of university places.
Perhaps someone could also ask why the Coalition is absolving upmarket developers of their obligation to build affordable homes. The public is in desperate need of medium-density housing and garden squares, but Mr Cameron's new communitarians will live in gated enclaves, sheltered by honeysuckle and CCTV from the estates envisaged by Iain Duncan Smith as transit camps for the very poor.
That urban geography is a metaphor for the society we will get if the Coalition is not held properly to account by a party whose putative leaders are all tagged with the same label. The PM is saying that the depth of the current crisis is all Labour's fault, and he's partly right.
Stories of Labour profligacy are exaggerated. As Mr Burnham points out, Mr Brown, an eager hacker of back offices, cut the Department of Culture, Media and Sport by half. But, as he, and no doubt the other contenders, will also say this week, Labour lost its way. Blair and Brown believed for too long that the City could play midwife and fairy godmother to a fair society, and that globalisation was an unmitigated force for good. They were wrong, and those who lost their jobs, their homes and their faith in politics somewhere on the road to a fake Utopia have called them to account.
If Labour's hopefuls are ever to make amends, it won't be by playing to imagined prejudice and falling back on the surly, inward-looking populism of the immigration debate. The bitter truth about the last election is that voting for the people's party became the luxury of the affluent. Now, with an age of unrest dawning, Labour will never win back the trust of the fearful by whipping up the politics of fear.
It must do so by explaining why no citizen is an island and why none is to be denied a share of wealth and power. Of the four potential leaders, the one who best explains how austerity can shape the common good will win.
