Sable’s glory, a Lunenburg werewolf and A Possible Madness
IAN FAIRCLOUGH
FORGET ROCKIN’ — this year try reading around the Christmas tree with any number of books that have Atlantic Canada connections.

Here are just a few of the possibilities from this year’s crop you could be wrapping up for the book lover on your list.

GENERAL INTEREST

Sable Island: Photography by Damian Lidgard (Nimbus, $27.95)

Photographer and zoologist Lidgard has been visiting Sable Island as a scientist annually since 1997. While collecting research and data he also takes photographs, more than 100 of which appear in this book highlighting the beauty of the island that sits 300 km from Halifax. While the famed Sable Island horses are on the cover of the book and have a section inside, the book also provides close-up glimpses of the splendour and intriguing aspects of the island, from old houses and shipwrecks disappearing over time, to the shifting sands and dunes, to the raw beauty of the land, sky and ocean on the island.

The Amazing Foot Race of 1921: Halifax to Vancouver in 134 Days by Shirley Jean Roll Tucker (Nimbus, $19.95)

In 1921, an attempt to set a new record for walking across Canada turned into a dash for glory as three pairs of Nova Scotians battled through snow, rain, heat, mosquitoes and trash-talking telegrams to try to be the first to reach Vancouver. It was a race in which the competitors started days apart but that still went down to the wire before the winners crossed the finish line. The book follows the teams as they work through small-town Canada and large cities alike in a race followed with rapt attention by readers of race sponsor The Chronicle Herald.

The Devil and the Deep Blue Sea by Steven Laffoley (Pottersfield Press, $19.95)

It’s a 115-year-old cold case as Steven Laffoley looks into the bloody killing of a ship’s captain, his wife and the second mate as the ship sailed from Boston to South America. Laffoley found the story while scanning public archives and decided to research the case. He creates an actual story out of published accounts from the morgue and waterfront of Halifax to a jail and courthouse in Boston, putting the reader in those cities and on the ship to create a novel with characters, settings and dialogue.

Plunder and Pillage: Atlantic Canada’s Brutal and Bloodthirsty Pirates and Privateers by Harold Horwood (Formac, $19.95)

If speculative high-seas sleuthing isn’t your thing, take a look at Horwood’s collection of some of the nastiest scourges to sail the ocean around and out of Atlantic Canada. While many of his 15 tales involve captains who stole and pillaged without any blood being spilled, not all hands are clean in this compilation of 300 years of seafaring villains who stole for themselves, or sometimes for king and country.

Rogues and Rascals: True Stories of Maritime Lives and Legends by Bob Kroll (Nimbus, $17.95)

For those who like their ne’er-do-wells a little less nasty and maybe even comical, there is Kroll’s collection of 200 stories from the Maritimes. Some are tales of local characters who wouldn’t cause anyone harm but a few are the more dangerous variety, including Flat Nose George Curry from Prince Edward Island, who decided to become a train robber and eventually joined Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid’s Hole in the Wall gang.

Canada’s Soldiers in South Africa: Tales from the Boer War, 1899-1902 by John Boileau (Amazing Stories, $9.95)

Before Vimy Ridge and Juno Beach, Canada was creating a military identity for itself when it sent troops to South Africa to help Britain in the Boer War. More than 7,000 Canadian troops were involved in Canada’s first overseas combat mission, and Boileau looks at everything from the national fervour that led to prime minister Wilfrid Laurier’s decision to send troops in the first place (initially on a converted cattle boat) to individual battles. Boileau also writes about the bravery of individual members of the force that brought Canada its first foreign battle honours and its first Victoria Cross for a member of a formed Canadian military unit.

FOR FUN

The Lunenburg Werewolf and Other Stories of the Supernatural by Steve Vernon (Nimbus, $15.95)

Vernon combed the province for these 23 stories of apparitions, beasts and other creatures in a great book to curl up with on a dark and stormy night, or to share stories around the campfire. While there are a few friendly ghosts, such as an artistic Kentville spirit and a mischievous Cape Breton bigfoot, there are also demon dogs and spectres guarding the Oak Island treasure, and a chilling story of the title monster, the Lunenburg werewolf.

Red Sky At Night: Superstitions and Wives’ Tales by Vernon Oickle (MacIntyre Purcell, $16.95)

Anyone who has ever hung a horseshoe over the door, tossed spilled salt over their shoulder or avoided walking under a ladder should enjoy Oickle’s book of some distinctly Nova Scotian superstitions that he has collected from around the province. Besides some of the well-known ones, he also looks at old wives tales and works to debunk some of those that we know we shouldn’t believe in, but do anyway. Local celebrities also chime in with some of the things they do instinctively not because they necessarily believe in superstitions, but because it’s just what people have always done.

PEOPLE

The Gift: A MADD Mother’s Journey of Healing by Margaret Miller (Nimbus, $19.95)

The former president of MADD Canada talks about coping with the death of her son at the hands of a drunk driver and the long journey of healing the organization helped her make in coping with his death. It takes the reader along with her as she tries to deal with not only the death, but the aftermath and trying to pick up the shattered pieces of her life.

For Your Tomorrow: The Way of an Unlikely Soldier by Melanie Murray (Random House, $29.95)

The aunt of a Canadian soldier born in New Brunswick and whose parents live in Nova Scotia tells the story of her nephew’s unlikely enlistment as a soldier, his rise through the ranks that took him to Afghanistan and the grief that struck the family from coast to coast when he was killed by an improvised explosive device.

Otto Strasser in Paradise: A Nazi in Nova Scotia by H. Millard Wright (Pottersfield, $17.95)

An outspoken Nazi on the run from Hitler after a falling out with the German leader, Otto Strasser eventually ended up in the Annapolis Valley. Monitored by the RCMP, he wanted to go back to Germany after the war but he wasn’t allowed to leave Canada until 1955.

FICTION

A Possible Madness by Frank Macdonald (UCB Press, $24.95) Like many smallish and inelegant towns that dot the coastlines and crossroads of this country, Shean’s postwar, post-industrial and post-political economy is in desperate disrepair, and the lengths that some civic leaders will go to in order to do what’s best for a town like Shean sometimes require a leap of faith that has unintended consequences.

Big Town by Stephens Gerard Malone (Nimbus, $18.95)

Seventeen-year-old Early Okander lives with his father in a shack, a white family on the outskirts of the Halifax community of Africville. It is the early 1960s, and Early and his young friends, Toby and Chub, start to hear whispers that the city wants to move the residents of Africville out of their homes.

WIN A BOOK:

Courtesy of MacIntyre Purcell Publishing, The Chronicle Herald is giving away five copies of Red Sky at Night: Superstitions and Wives’ Tales by Vernon Oickle. To win, send your name, address and daytime telephone number to contest@herald.ca. Please type Red Sky Book Award in the subject line. Entries can also be dropped off at The Chronicle Herald building, 2717 Joseph Howe Dr., Halifax, during regular business hours (Monday through Friday, 8 a.m.-6 p.m.) or mailed to Red Sky Book Award contest, c/o The Chronicle Herald, PO Box 938, Halifax, N.S., B3J 3S5. Contest deadline is 9 a.m., Dec. 16. The winner will be notified by phone and announced in the books section of The Sunday Herald on Dec. 18.
