Inmate suspected in N.S. murders
EVA HOARE
Nova Scotia cops say a man sitting in a British Columbia jail could be responsible for a slew of murders in this province dating back 20 years.

A 38–year–old former Nova Scotia man became a prime suspect in up to a dozen cases, mainly in Nova Scotia, after he was picked up in B.C. late last fall, say several sources who asked not to be identified.

So far, detectives in Halifax and B.C. have compiled information that might connect the man with a number of slayings, including the disappearance of Kimberly McAndrew in August 1989 and the January 1992 killing in Nova Scotia of Andrea King of Surrey, B.C.

Const. Gary Martin, spokesman for Halifax regional police, acknowledged Monday that officers from his force and the Mounties are working together on several murder files.

But he would not confirm reports the suspect in B.C. is a key factor in the investigation.

"We won't get into any information that we've received, " Const. Martin said.

The man's name cannot be released because he still faces trial in Nova Scotia on a number of charges.Police don't yet have enough evidence from the joint investigation to lay any new charges.

There are reports that officers in Halifax have searched and obtained evidence from a Quinpool Road apartment the man apparently once rented.

Sources said the officers ripped up a section of floorboard in the apartment that had a dark stain on it. That section is now being analyzed by an RCMP DNA expert.

Miss McAndrew was last seen walking along Quinpool Road on Aug. 12, 1989. She had left her job at Canadian Tire at about 4:20 p.m. and was never seen again.

There are also reports that police have received tips about the suspect allegedly having an item that might have belonged to Miss King.

Const. Martin refused to comment on those reports or relate how police were tipped."For compassionate reasons, " police will not name the murder victims whose files detectives are going over, but Const. Martin said their families have already been contacted or will be.

Miss King's mother, Ann King, said police came to her Surrey home about six weeks ago to show her photographs of clothing and jewelry that might have belonged to her daughter.

"We were able to confirm that indeed she owned a pair of shoes that were similar" to a pair in one photo, Ms. King said.

She also recognized a pair of earrings from the photos, she said.

"She owned some that looked like the ones in the photograph, " Ms. King said. "But I can't confirm yet."

Ms. King said she is pleased at the effort police have put into solving her daughter's murder.

"I think this will give us some of the answers that are missing – who, what, where, and all those things that we don't really know – and for me personally I need to know some of them.

"This may mean the conclusion of five years of trauma for us. But at the moment, I'm trying not to get my hopes too high."

Over the years, police have looked at the idea of a serial killer but haven't had enough solid information to proceed.

The idea was raised again late last year when serial killer Clifford Olson claimed to be behind a number of unsolved murders across Canada, including Nova Scotia.

There are 11 unsolved homicides in the RCMP jurisdiction in this province, and about 15 on Halifax regional police's unsolved list. Unsolved murders of young women in greater Halifax date back to 1974.

Police have feverishly worked on their joint investigation since late fall, not long after B.C. police arrested the man and charged him with six counts of impersonating a police officer, three counts of kidnapping and two counts of impaired driving.

The charges were laid after a man made several attempts to lure children and young women between 12 and 20 into his car.B.C. police found the man with a 20–year–old mentally handicapped woman in the backseat of his vehicle.

The woman, who hadn't been harmed, thought the suspect was a police officer.

Police confiscated a false police badge and handcuffs.

Shortly after his arrest, the B.C. Crown's office wanted to have the man declared a dangerous offender.

A decision on whether to pursue that designation will be made April 21.

The man pleaded guilty to two charges of kidnapping and forcible confinement laid Oct. 6 in B.C.

The suspect has a lengthy record of serious offences in metro Halifax.

While the man was being sentenced last year for masturbating in front of a group of children outside a Hammonds Plains Road apartment building, a Crown attorney said his presentence report indicated the man was a "borderline pedophile" with "volcanic sexual appetites."

In asking for jail time, Chris Morris said the report painted a picture of the man "that is very, very troubling."

The man was sentenced to three years' probation and ordered to receive extensive counselling.In September 1993, he received a suspended sentence on charges of aggravated sexual assault and forcible confinement for tying up and raping his ex–girlfriend.

The man is also wanted on a Halifax regional police warrant for five outstanding charges, including criminal harassment by engaging in threatening conduct; committing a nuisance by endangering lives, safety or the health of the public; and passing false messages with intent to injure or alarm someone.

He is also charged with breaching a probation order dated January 1997.
