Former Dartmouth mayor dies
PATRICIA BROOKS ARENBURG, THE HERALD NEWS
Former Dartmouth mayor Daniel Brownlow died in hospital Wednesday at the age of 93.

In 1976, Brownlow beat out incumbent Eileen Stubbs to become mayor of the City of Lakes, an honour he held until he retired from politics in 1985.

“He was such a gentleman and always very pleasant and a fine, fine man,” Gloria McCluskey, former Dartmouth mayor and councillor for Dartmouth Centre, said Thursday morning.

While McCluskey never served on Dartmouth council with Brownlow, “certainly I always respected him,” she said.

She remembers many years ago calling alderman Brownlow, who represented the area in which she lived, about a neighbour’s dog that was kept tied outside with a collar that appeared to be digging into its neck.

“One day, Danny came down, and I don’t know if he took the dog or if he had somebody with him, but they took it.”

HALIFAX MAYOR MIKE SAVAGE: Brownlow was Dartmouth's gentleman mayor
FROM OUR ARCHIVES: Features on Brownlow

The former mayors lived fairly close to one another and attended the same church, St. Paul’s Roman Catholic Church on Windmill Road, where his funeral service will likely be held.

After Brownlow’s wife Genevieve died a few years ago, McCluskey said, “I’d see his car every morning down at the cemetery.”

McCluskey visited Brownlow at his home during her last municipal campaign. She said “his mind was very clear.”

“Somebody told me if you wanted to know anything about Dartmouth, you could call Danny. He had all the minutes of the meetings and everything.”

Mike Brownlow said his father lived at home until about mid-May, when he began having mobility issues. His father went to Camp Hill Veteran’s Memorial hospital in Halifax when a bed opened up.

Brownlow, who came to Canada from Ireland in 1927, served in the Second World War and the Korean War as a naval officer. He later served as an officer in the Royal Canadian Naval Reserve and on a number of ships, said Mike Brownlow, who has been sifting through his father’s many medals.

There were many medals and military decorations his father never bothered to display, but it wasn’t because they weren’t important to him, he said.

“He didn’t want to show them off — he wasn’t like that,” the son said.

Eventually, the family settled in Dartmouth, where Daniel Brownlow became an alderman in 1963 and mayor 13 years later.

Both his parents saw this public service work as a joint duty, and it was a full-time commitment for his father.

“He just loved Dartmouth, and Dartmouth was everything to him.”

His father was instrumental in the building of the Dartmouth Sportsplex and Dartmouth General Hospital, and he was proud to have been president of the Federation of Canadian Municipalities, Brownlow said.

“He saw politics as a way to make change, which he did.”

A past director of the International Education Centre at Saint Mary’s University, Daniel Brownlow received an honourary doctorate of civil law from the university in 2004 and many other honours during his life.

But most importantly, Mike Brownlow said, “People just loved him.”

Daniel Brownlow leaves behind his four sons — Michael, Patrick, Sean and Timothy — and his extended family.
