Dancing the war away in Halifax
BILL SPURR, THE CHRONICLE HERALD
Blisters from dancing every night, being sure you didn’t wear the same dress too often, trying to keep the names straight of all the young men calling on you.

War is hell.

Vicki Grant’s new documentary, Dancing Was My Duty, airs Saturday at 8 p.m. on CBC Maritimes. Grant, a young adult novelist, had talked to several older Halifax ladies as part of her research for a new teen mystery when she realized the women had a more interesting story.

“I was starting to hear these fantastic stories. These women were telling me about these non-stop parties,” said Grant. “There were men from all over the world here, which I hadn’t realized, Dutch, Norwegian, British, French, New Zealand, Australia. And all these young men needed something to do.”

Hundreds of thousands of servicemen spent time in Halifax during the war. To boost morale and battle boredom, the military and locals organized dances. Lots of dances, in boat clubs, mess halls, church halls, on board ships, in private homes. The city swung seven nights (and several afternoons) a week.

With the ratio of men to women in the city about 10 to one, local girls were in high demand.

“For the girls, in a certain respect it was their job,” Grant said. “But also … before this, the girls would have just known guys all their lives and would probably have ended up marrying someone they had known since they were a kid.

“Now, suddenly, there were these gorgeous young men from around the world there, and they were going out to dances every night.”

Grant interviewed several Halifax ladies in their late 80s or early 90s for Dancing Was My Duty. They still get a twinkle in their eye when they remember the harried social life of the war years.

“One time, I found myself going out with three men in one night,” remembered Mungay Grant, 91, the daughter of a lieutenant-governor.

“That was kind of awkward. We had lots of interesting new boyfriends.”

The documentary is full of fun factoids: It was easy to tell which women were the prostitutes that flocked to Halifax because they wore white overshoes; Citadel Hill was known as Burberry Hill, named for the brand of overcoat that British sailors wore, and which were spread out on the hill to keep furtive lovers dry. (The ladies in the documentary took pains to point out that as “nice girls,” they hadn’t gone to Burberry Hill.)

Visiting officers lived a much different life in Halifax than enlisted men. Officers got automatic membership in the city’s private clubs, like Ashburn, the Waegwoltic and the Halifax Club. Enlisted men walked the streets.

“If you were an officer, you could walk into any club in the city and they’d say ‘What’ll it be, sir?’ We forget how stratified it was back then,” Grant said. “There was an assumption that if you were an officer, you worked to a higher standard than the enlisted man.

“The thing that I loved, and I guess this is the teenage girl in me yet, was about these balls on the destroyers in the basin, and this whole idea of there being a list.

“The ‘good’ Halifax families put their girls’ names on a list and these young women in their teens or early 20s would get a letter from a French officer, or whatever, on his way into port, requesting the pleasure of her company at a ball on such and such a date, and off they would go.”

Ruth Graham Wallace, one of the ladies in Dancing Was My Duty, was one of five unmarried sisters kept busy every night of the week going to dances with servicemen from all over the world. One of her friends had a date with Prince Phillip.

“He was a very handsome, blond young man, looked like a Nordic god,” was the description of the queen’s future husband.

“Ruth told me a story that didn’t get in the documentary about a sister who was going out one night and said ‘if so-and-so calls, just pretend you’re me and go out with him,’” Grant said.

She got the archival footage in the documentary from the CBC library, while the photos came from the Nova Scotia Archives, Shearwater Aviation Museum, Maritime Command Museum and the people who appear in the documentary.


