You could just tell that he was gone
DAN ARSENAULT
A Dartmouth man says he is still shaken after the shooting death of a pizza delivery man outside his apartment Saturday night.

Donald Manning, who lives in an apartment at 15 Joseph Young St., was lying on his couch at 9:30 p.m. when someone shot and killed Donald (Jiggy) Chad Smith, 27.

"I just heard a very loud bang, and my clock fell off the wall and landed in my lap," Manning said Tuesday afternoon. "The first thing I thought was maybe somebody outside with a baseball bat hit the wall or something."

He ran to his bedroom and grabbed a golf club and went outside.

"As soon as I walked out the door, I saw the pizza box and the fellow laying on the ground just outside the door."

Manning said the victim looked much younger than 27, but he noted that it was dark at the time.

"He was shot in the upper left chest."

Smith wasn’t conscious, Manning said. He put a blanket over Smith and had his wife call 911.

Manning said he checked to see if Smith had a pulse and saw him twitch. The same thing happened when he checked to see if Smith was breathing.

"You could just tell that he was gone."

Manning said he didn’t see anyone else in the area. Police have been asking him basic questions, but he had little to tell them, he said.

The layout of the apartment complex, with a dark, outdoor corridor between two buildings, meant Smith walked into a perfect ambush, he said.

"I figure the spot must have been scouted out beforehand. It’s up at the end of the parking lot. There’s very little traffic."

He said he thinks the shooter must have been close to his building in order to knock his clock off the wall.

"I feel bad for the guy," Manning said of the victim. "Nobody deserved that.

"It’s been a little rougher on me than I thought it would be. It bothers me when I go in and out of the door. It’s kind of not hard to picture him laying there."

He and his wife have no plans to move, but he has heard that others have left the area since the shooting.

Manning said the couple’s children are staying elsewhere for a while.

"There’s bad stuff going on everywhere."

On Tuesday, police officers found a firearm near the scene and they are asking for public help to find a vehicle that may have been connected to the crime.

Halifax Regional Police said a firearm was found in woods behind some apartment buildings on Farthington Place on Sunday night. The woods are near Joseph Young Street.

"The weapon is being tested to try and determine if it is connected with this homicide," said Const. Brian Palmeter, a police spokesman.

He wouldn’t say what type of gun was found or what type of gun killed Smith.

If it is the murder weapon, "it would open up other investigative avenues," Palmeter said.

Officers will try to see who owns the gun and check it for fingerprints, he said.

Also, police are trying to locate a full-size, red sport utility vehicle that has chrome rims. The vehicle, which may be a Cadillac Escalade, was seen in the area with loud music coming from it.

"The vehicle was noticeably absent after the incident," Palmeter said. "While we’re not sure if it’s connected to the shooting, we are interested in locating it and speaking with the owner."

Smith’s obituary indicates that he was born in North Sydney and that he leaves behind his parents, a brother and a girlfriend. The obituary said he was "a devoted and loving father to his two girls," who are two and seven.

His funeral will be held Friday at 10 a.m. at St. Rose of Lima Catholic Church in Fall River.

Anyone with information about the murder is asked to contact investigators at 490-5333 or Crime Stoppers at 1-800-222-8477.
