Meteorologist Coade makes Guinness mark
THE CHRONICLE HERALD 
Meteorologist Peter Coade has broken the Guinness World Record for the longest career as a weather forecaster.

The official certificate received from the London headquarters of the Guinness World Records states: “The longest career as a weather forecaster is 50 years, 8 months and 21 days, and was achieved by Peter Coade (Canada) at CBC Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, from 1 October 1962 to 21 June, 2013,” says a news release from CBC.

The previous Guinness World Record for the longest career as a weather forecaster was 48 years, two months, 27 days, recorded by Dave Devall (Canada) at CTV Toronto from Jan. 7, 1961, to his retirement on April 3, 2009, the release said.

FROM OUR ARCHIVES: Coade has weathered the years

“I’m thrilled to receive this honour,” said Coade, in the release. “I’ve had a very rewarding career in broadcast media and meteorology. I couldn’t be happier. I began my career in the black and white days of CBC and anticipate ending it with CBC.”

Coade’s first appearance on CBC Television was in the late 1950s, when he job shadowed weatherman Rube Hornstein for a day and got hooked on the weather.

He joined the federal government weather service on Oct. 1, 1962. While with the government, Coade worked in Truro, Goose Bay and Toronto and provided daily weather forecasts on local radio.

He started his media career with CBC in 1967 while he was in Goose Bay. He presented the weather nightly from CFLA-TV to a largely American audience, members of the United States air force and their families.

While stationed in Toronto with the federal weather service, he was also staff meteorologist for radio station CFRB, working with people like Gordon Sinclair and Betty Kennedy, of Front Page Challenge fame.

Coade worked for ATV-ASN from March 1990 until he re-joined CBC in September 2007. For six years, he was meteorologist on CBC News Nova Scotia and CBC News New Brunswick suppertime shows as well as CBC Maritimes at 11.

On Dec. 3, 2012, Coade became CBC Radio One’s morning meteorologist, switching roles with fellow CBC meteorologist Kalin Mitchell.

The 70-year-old Coade is still keeping his record going. He can be heard Monday to Friday on CBC Radio One on six morning shows in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island.

“Peter is a mainstay in weather forecasting and trusted by audiences throughout the Maritimes,” said Andrew Cochran, senior managing director, Atlantic Canada, for CBC English services, in the release.

“We’re very happy for him and wish him our heartiest congratulations on this Guinness World Record achievement.”
