Jail unlikely in Parsons case
FRANCES WILLICK, THE CHRONICLE HERALD
A Dalhousie law professor says he doesn’t expect the two teenagers charged in the Rehtaeh Parsons case to end up in jail.

Wayne MacKay said it’s relatively rare for young people to be accused of child pornography offences.

“I’d be surprised if young people charged with this normally spend any jail time,” he said Friday.

ALSO SEE: Police say arrests couldn't have come before now
MORE COVERAGE: Online activists hindered Parsons investigation, police say
FROM OUR ARCHIVES: Complete Coverage of Rehtaeh Parsons case

Police announced Thursday evening that two 18-year-olds had been charged in Rehtaeh’s case. One faces a charge of making child porn and a charge of distributing it, while the other faces two charges of distributing child porn. Neither has been named because both were minors when the alleged offences occurred.

The teens are to appear in Halifax youth court next Thursday.

MacKay said the Youth Criminal Justice Act contains “alternative measures” such as community service that can replace a sentence of incarceration.

Under the Criminal Code, an adult convicted of making or distributing child pornography receives a mandatory minimum sentence of a year in jail for an indictable offence and six months for a summary conviction.

But there are no mandatory minimum sentences for young offenders.

Last year in British Columbia, a teenager was sentenced to a year on probation for distributing obscene material by emailing photos of an alleged rape at a party in Pitt Meadows, B.C. The court also instructed the teen, who was not named because of his age, to write an essay on the negative effects of social media.

Another young man, Dennis Warrington, was given a conditional discharge with 18 months on probation for distributing obscene material by posting photos of the same alleged assault on his Facebook page.

Both young men were initially charged with child porn offences but pleaded guilty to the lesser charge.

MacKay believes that some people who have been following the Parsons case might view sentences like that as too lenient.

“I think people would be pretty unhappy with that,” he said.

The high-profile nature of the case shouldn’t influence the sentencing, but MacKay said the judge will have the world spotlight to contend with.

“Judges, I’m sure, are very principled about it, but they do live in the real world,” he said. “It would be hard not to know that the world is watching what they’re going to do out of the Rehtaeh Parsons case.”

The Avalon Sexual Assault Centre in Halifax issued a statement on its Facebook page Friday evening urging more education and greater awareness about child pornography laws.

The charges in the Parsons case send a message to the community that making and distributing child porn are criminal actions, the statement said.

“Given the prevalence of the spreading of pornographic images through new technologies, we must continue to push for more education and awareness on these issues, as well as the new laws,” the Facebook post says.

Police did not lay sexual assault charges in the case, saying there was not enough evidence.

Rehtaeh’s parents say the Cole Harbour teen was assaulted in November 2011 when she was 15.

Avalon also called for changes in societal attitudes toward sexual assault.

“In order to prevent a similar situation from occurring again and to heal and move forward as a community, we need to change rape culture that condones and perpetuates sexual victimization, improve our understanding of consent, improve sexual assault response and increase sexual assault programs and services in Nova Scotia.”

A third young Nova Scotian will also appear in youth court next week to face child porn charges.

A 15-year-old boy from the North Preston area is charged with making and possessing child pornography and making it available to others.

Police allege the boy took a video of a consensual sex act involving a 15-year-old girl without her knowledge and posted the video on a social media site.
