Halifax Explosion memorial service draws large crowd
CLARE MELLOR 
A large crowd, including many young schoolchildren, gathered at Halifax’s Fort Needham Memorial Park on Friday morning for a ceremony marking the 96th anniversary of the Halifax Explosion.

There was applause all around when it was announced that Violet (Muise) Chisholm, 96, a survivor of the explosion, was in the crowd.

Chisholm, just six months old at the time, watched Friday’s service from a wheelchair.

ALSO SEE: Could it happen again?

The 1917 explosion occurred at 9:05 a.m. on Dec. 6, damaging much of the city’s north end. About 2,000 people died and about 9,000 others were injured, many of them seriously.

The SS Imo, a Norwegian ship, and SS Mont Blanc, a French munitions ship, collided in the Narrows of Halifax Harbour. The Mont Blanc caught fire and exploded.

On Friday, shortly after 9 a.m., bells rang, wreaths were laid, and a minute of silence was held for those lost.

“This was the world’s largest man-made explosion prior to the nuclear age,” said Halifax Mayor Mike Savage at the memorial ceremony.

At the time, the population of Halifax-Dartmouth was 60,000 to 65,000, he said.

“If that explosion happened today and took the same amount of casualties as a percentage of the population as it did in 1917, we would have (12,000) to 14,000 deaths and 60,000 injuries.”

Savage said the annual gathering is also a tribute to the resilience of the city, and the strength of the human spirit.

There are fewer and fewer explosion survivors left. Four are known to have passed away in 2013 — Mary Murphy, George Sim, Kathleen MacDonald, and Louise Connolly — said Coun. Jennifer Watts (Peninsula North).

“Several of those were people who came every year (to the anniversary), and, in fact, last year were here on the hill to be with us during this time of remembrance,” Watts said.

Relatives and friends of explosion survivors were also among Friday’s crowd. Alexa McDonough said she has only missed the annual service once or twice in her life.

The former federal and provincial NDP leader heard many stories about the explosion from her grandfather.

“My mother’s family had moved back to Truro just before the explosion. My grandfather was setting up a new — the first — hospital in Truro and had two box cars full of hospital equipment and medical supplies … and they brought them to the outskirts of Halifax,” McDonough said.

“They then brought the supplies into the Commons where help was administered to those who survived,” she said.

Marilyn Gurney spoke at the service about the experiences of women during and after the explosion.

“The majority of volunteer aid came for the ladies of the south end. These ladies helped identify the wounded and the dead, filled mortuary bags, assisted families to reunite, found temporary housing, nursed the wounded, tended the children. assisted with funerals, cooked meals, wrote letters and reports.”

“But most importantly, they lifted the spirits of the destitute,” she said

The 100th anniversary of the explosion will be marked in 2017.

On Tuesday, Halifax regional council will discuss possibly forming an advisory committee to help plan a 100th anniversary event.

“That will be an opportunity for us to begin the discussion about what we want that commemoration to be,” said Watts.

On Thursday, the Christmas tree that Halifax gives annually to Boston as a token of appreciation for the assistance that city gave following the explosion was lit, Savage said.

