C.B.–born physicist gets big award for tiny particles
PATRICIA BROOKS ARENBURG
Editor’s note: Staff reporter Patricia Brooks Arenburg interviewed Arthur McDonald, Canada’s newest Nobel Prize laureate, in 2007, when he was also honoured for his work with neutrinos. Here’s her story from that interview.

He has seen and measured the smallest, most abundant particles in the universe to help answer some of life's biggest questions.

And his discovery is changing textbooks around the world.

"We are pushing back the boundaries of our knowledge to get a very clear picture of where the things that make us up were created in the first place, " physicist

Art McDonald said in a telephone interview Thursday.

The Sydney–born physicist and Queen's University professor was in Philadelphia on Thursday, where he was preparing to receive the 2007 Benjamin Franklin Medal in Physics with Yoji Totsuka from the University of Tokyo for their work with neutrinos, or subatomic particles.

Mr. McDonald and Mr. Totsuka "were leaders in finding proof that the standard model (of particle physics) was simply wrong when it came to neutrinos, " states the Benjamin Franklin Institute Awards website.

They found that on the way from the sun to the Earth, "the various neutrinos were not stable but could change into each other as they travelled. This also showed that neutrinos, long thought to weigh nothing, have mass."

Mr. McDonald leads a team of about 150 scientists from around the world and students at the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, built two kilometres below the surface, at a nickel mine.

With a giant neutrino detector at the observatory, Mr. McDonald and his team could spot all the neutrinos.

The subatomic particles can travel about "a million billion kilometres with a 50 per cent chance of striking something, so they're very hard to detect, " he said.

They were created in the Big Bang, he said, and continue to be produced in the core of stars like the sun.

It takes about eight minutes, almost the speed of light, for them to travel from the sun to the Earth, he said. But it takes several hundred thousand years for these particles, which he described as changes at the sun's core, to make their way out to the sun's surface.

Through this work, Mr. McDonald's team has been able to demonstrate that they understand what is happening at the core of the sun.

"The sun is not going to change substantially for the next 200,000 years, " he said.

"If there's a problem with global warming, it's not going to be the sun's fault. It's going to be on our part."

The Sudbury team wanted to learn what impact neutrinos had on the universe, and have learned that they have little effect. In fact, he said, it's the dark matter that surrounds the Milky Way and keeps everything in it from spilling into space that has a "substantive effect."

Identifying this dark matter, also known as WIMPS (weakly interacting massive particles), is his next goal, as he tries to secure further funding to create a laboratory at the observatory. Already, he said, scientists from around the world are coming forward with experiments.

"This is outside of typical human experience, " he admits. But he said he and his team are simply trying to answer questions that "people have been attempting to understand since people began looking at the sky on a starry night."

