Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump? 
Barney Henderson, The Telegraph
America goes to the polls this morning to decide the winner of the most divisive election in modern history. 

After a bruising 18-month election cycle, we will know within hours whether  Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton will be the next President of the United States.

Voting began in the early hours of this morning in New Hampshire, where the village of Dixville Notch became the first in the nation to declare shortly after midnight local time. Mrs Clinton secured the first confirmed scalp - however tiny - with four of the village's eight adults voting for her. Mr Trump got two votes, with Gary Johnson, the Libertarian and Mitt Romney, the 2012 GOP candidate, one apiece.

The final, frenzied hours of campaigning saw stars galore and mad dashes to key swing states - including, notably, Michigan, which Democrats have conceded they might lose.

 Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, center, her husband former President Bill Clinton and their daughter Chelsea Clinton, are joined on stage by President Barack Obama, first lady Michelle Obama during a rally at Independence Mall in Philadelphia
Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, centre, her husband former President Bill Clinton and their daughter Chelsea Clinton, are joined on stage by President Barack Obama, first lady Michelle Obama during a rally at Independence Mall in Philadelphia CREDIT: AP
The two candidates made their final pleas for votes to the undecided voters who could help them over the line tonight.

Mrs Clinton was given a 90 percent chance of defeating Mr Trump, according to the final Reuters/Ipsos States of the Nation stats released last night. If all recent polls are correct, she will become the first female president of the country tonight - the early hours of tomorrow morning UK time.

Most Asian markets rose this morning - China stocks rose to a 10-month high - with investors optimistic but cautious over improving prospects for a win for Mrs Clinton.

 Republican Presidential nominee Donald Trump (C) takes the stage with running mate Mike Pence and their families during a rally at the SNHU Arena in Manchester, New Hampshire
Republican Presidential nominee Donald Trump (C) takes the stage with running mate Mike Pence and their families during a rally at the SNHU Arena in Manchester, New Hampshire CREDIT: BARCROFT
State officials are braced for chaos today. Early voting has seen hours-long queues at polling stations over the past few days, with cases of people being turned away. Several Democrat activists have filed lawsuits alleging voter intimidation by Trump supporters.

Mr Trump has urged his supporters to personally monitor polling stations for potential voting fraud, raising the spectre of clashes.

Last night, Barack and Michelle Obama "passed on the baton" to Mrs Clinton at a star-studded rally in Philadelphia, with performances by Bruce Springsteen and Jon Bon Jovi. (Vote Trump vs vote Clinton.)

 A young boy hugs President Barack Obama who was greeting supporters at the University of New Hampshire yesterday
A young boy hugs President Barack Obama who was greeting supporters at the University of New Hampshire yesterday CREDIT: AP
“Tomorrow we face the test of our time," she said, her voice hoarse, as she painted herself as the positive, progressive choice.

She said she marvelled at a country where "a girl like me from the South Side of Chicago, whose great-great-grandfather was a slave, can go to some of the finest universities on earth. Where the biracial son of a single mother from Hawaii and the son of a single mother from Hope, Arkansas, can both make it to the White House."

“Let’s make history together,” she concluded, to the roars of a huge crowd.

Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump's last 24 hours
01:42
Mr Obama, whose approval ratings neared a record high of 56 per cent yesterday, said he had been asked recently whether the hope and optimism from his 2008 campaign remained.

"The answer's yes.. and that's because of you. In the letters you've written me, in the tears you've shed for a lost loved one, I've seen again and again your goodness and your strength and your heart," he said.

 Adams's election day cartoon
Adams's election day cartoon
Lady Gaga appeared at Mrs Clinton's final rally of the campaign in North Carolina, while Madonna also performed a surprise, free concert for the Democrat in New York's Washington Square Park last night.

Mr Trump appeared in Manchester, New Hampshire, alongside his family.

“I am asking for the votes of all Americans, Democrats, Republicans, independents,” Mr. Trump said, “who are so desperately in need of change.”

He repeated his assertion that it was "a rigged, rigged system”.


“And now it’s up to the American people to deliver the justice that we deserve at the ballot box tomorrow,” he said, referencing the decision by the FBI on Sunday night to announce that no criminal charges would be brought against Mrs Clinton over her use of a private email server.

The billionaire businessman said that if he loses today, he "will consider [his campaign] the single greatest waste of time, energy and money".

