Who is Michel Barnier? The EU's chief Brexit negotiator  - and 'Europe's most dangerous man'
Laura Hughes,   Robert Midgley, the telegraph
The European Commission has shown it is prepared to play "hardball" by appointing a former French minister who reportedly blames Britain for losing his job as head of its Brexit negotiations. Michel Barnier is to make his first detailed public statement today on Britain's departure from the EU, having remained quiet on the subject since taking up the role more than two months ago.

We have taken a look at Brussels' new chief negotiator.

Who is he? 

Michel Barnier, 65, first got involved in politics as a young Gaullist aged 15. He came to national prominence in 1986 when he won Albertville's bid to host the 1992 Winter Olympics in Savoy.

To many in the French elite, Mr Barnier is "le cretin des alpes", a jibe at his origin in the mountains of Savoy and a reference to the 18th-century Alpine valley dwellers who suffered brain damage caused by iodine deficiency.

Diplomats have suggested that the arch-federalist still resents Britain after losing his job after the French government lost a referendum on the European Constitution.

France held a referendum on the constitution after Tony Blair, the then Labour prime minister, promised one in Britain. In the event the referendum in Britain never took place.

Diplomats have said he is "far from a soul mate for Britain" and is hostile to the “Anglo-Saxon” free market model of capitalism.

In 2010 the Telegraph described him as “the most dangerous man in Europe”.

 Michel Barnier
Michel Barnier CREDIT: REUTERS
What experience does he have? 

Apart from his previous term in the Commission, as regional policy chief from 1999 to 2004, Mr Barnier has held a number of ministerial posts, including foreign affairs, agriculture and environment. 

He served as France's foreign minister for just a year between 2004 and 2005, losing his job after his Government lost the European Constitution referendum. 

Mr Barnier infuriated British minsters with his calls for more financial regulation when he held the post of EU commissioner for internal markets and services between 2010 and 2014.

In 2006 he worked as a special adviser to José Manuel Barroso, the President of the European Commission. 

In 2013 Mr Barroso fanned the flames of British debate over EU membership by insisting that fiscal union in the eurozone will lead to "intensified political union" for all 27 member states. 

Barroso warns Cameron not to alienate rest of Europe over migration Barroso warns Cameron not to alienate rest of Europe over migration
02:54
What are his priorities likely to be? 

Mr Barnier is likely to be a tough negotiator and take a hard line on EU rules. 

Speaking after the referendum vote, Mr Barnier said that shouldn't be "prisoner to the British question" during Brexit negotiations.

He has insisted that Britain will have to accept freedom of movement - "without exception or nuance" if it wants to retain access to the single market. 

In a French TV interview earlier this week, he said he had no "deadline" for negotiation talks to begin. 

Adding: "The British Government needs several months to fine tune its position. Our British friends know that there will be no negotiation before notification of their farewell letter."

Theresa May will no doubt have a tough job on her hands.

View image on Twitter
View image on Twitter
 Follow
Michel Barnier ✔@MichelBarnier
#EU-#US leaders'meeting in Warsaw with @JunckerEU @eucopresident @FedericaMog @POTUS :"the world needs a strong EU "
8:10 AM - Jul 8, 2016
 3 3 Replies   8 8 Retweets   16 16 likes
Twitter Ads info and privacy
What do people say about the appointment? 

Nick Clegg, the former deputy prime minister and now Liberal Democrat Europe spokesman,  said the appointment “will set alarm bells ringing in the City of London”. 

Jacques Lafitte of the Avisa investment advisory group said: “After all these years that the City has demonised Michel Barnier, often unjustly, the commission could not have sent a firmer message to the English.”

Jean-Claude Juncker  said: "I am very glad that my friend Michel Barnier accepted this important and challenging task. I wanted an experienced politician for this difficult job. 

Daniel Hannan, the eurosceptic Conservative MEP, told the Express: "Michel Barnier is an old-style Euro-integrationist. He wants the EU to be something like a single country."